markdown/tutorials-and-cheat-sheets/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o-notation.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Complexity and Big O Notation
permalink: /tutorials-cheat-sheets/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o-notation/
parent: Data Structures and Algorithms
grand_parent: Tutorials and Cheat Sheets
has_children: false
nav_order: 1
nav_exclude: false
has_toc: false
---

<h1>Complexity and Big O Notation</h1>

### Table of contents:

- [Complexity](#complexity)
  - [Why Complexity?](#why-complexity)
  - [Time Complexity](#time-complexity)
  - [Space Complexity](#space-complexity)
- [Big O Notation](#big-o-notation)
  - [Basic Theory](#basic-theory)
  - [Simple Cases](#simple-cases)
    - [Example 1: For loops](#example-1-for-loops)
    - [Example 2: Nested loops](#example-2-nested-loops)
    - [Example 2.5: Focus on the essentials](#example-25-focus-on-the-essentials)
  - [Advanced Cases](#advanced-cases)
    - [Example 3: Logarithmic complexity](#example-3-logarithmic-complexity)
    - [Example 4: The Sum of Integers 1 through N](#example-4-the-sum-of-integers-1-through-n)
    - [Example 5: Recursive functions](#example-5-recursive-functions)
    - [Example 6: Exponential runtimes](#example-6-exponential-runtimes)
- [What next?](#what-next)

# Complexity

Let's say you have two snippets of code (i.e. algorithms) in front of you. Each snippet performs the same overall function but the implementations are different. If you want to know which one is better in terms of performance/efficiency, the concept of complexity is used.

Complexity is a measure of algorithm performance in terms of the:
- execution time (Time Complexity)
- required storage space in memory (Space Complexity)
- required number of steps or arithmetic operations (Computational Complexity)

In terms of Data Structures and Algorithms, depending on the application, time complexity is typically the priority followed by space complexity. Computational complexity is more of a tie-breaker. 

## Why Complexity?

Why can't we just run each snippet separately and see which algorithm runs faster? There are a number of reasons for this:
- Algorithm performance depends on the input. Algorithms may be faster for certain inputs and slower for others. If we are just manually timing the code, performance can't be tested for all possible inputs.
- Algorithm performance depends on the hardware/environment in which it is run. Therefore, algorithm runtimes cannot be compared unless ran using the same device. 
- Both algorithms would need to be fully implemented in order to test/compare using this method.

Complexity addresses these problems because it provides a way to measure the performance of an algorithm for every possible input regardless of implementation or hardware. 

## Time Complexity

Time complexity addresses the above issues by summing the number of primitive operations and assuming they all take a constant amount of time. Primitive operations include:
- Accesses (i.e. accessing value from an array) -> `array[i]`
- Arithmetic -> `x + 5`
- Assignments -> `x = 5`
- Comparisons -> `x < 5`
- Returns -> `return x`

Let's see an example of this method on a simple algorithm to find the maximum value in a numerical array: 

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/complexity-example-1.png" alt="complexity-example-1.png"/>
</p>

Let's call the functional relationship between the number of operations required to handle an array `t(n)` where `n` is the size of the input array.

In the best case scenario, where the maximum value is at the beginning of the array, line 6 is skipped for every following loop. Therefore, only 4 operations take place in each iteration of the loop. As such:

<p align="center">t(n) = 2 + 1 + 2n + <ins><strong>4</strong></ins>(n-1) + 1 = 6n</p>

If we were to graph this relationship, we'd get a straight line with a slope of 6:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/time-complexity-graph.png" alt="time-complexity-graph.png"/>
</p>

Therefore, for every additional value we add to this array, we're increasing the execution time by 6 primitive operations. 

In the worst case scenario, where the maximum value is at the end of the array, line 6 is never skipped. Therefore, 6 operations take place in each iteration of the loop. As a result: 

<p align="center">t(n) = 2 + 1 + 2n + <ins><strong>6</strong></ins>(n-1) + 1 = 8n-2</p>

In the average case, the maximum value will likely be somewhere in between the first and last element of the array. The resulting performance, therefore, will be somewhere between the best and the worst case.

From this example (more complex examples are to come), you should see how algorithm performance is dependent on the input. In the above example, the size of the input array influenced the execution time of the algorithm. The potential order of numbers within the array resulted in best and worst case execution times. There are 3 notations used to describe these execution times: O, Ω, and Θ.
- O (big O): Upper bound on algorithm execution time.
- Ω (big omega): Lower bound on algorithm execution time.
- Θ (big theta): Both O and Ω simultaneously (unnecessary for tutorial scope).

In industry, the only notation that really matters is Big O. That's because the worst case scenario is the most useful piece of information. Efficient algorithms typically use code that has the minimal "worst case scenario".

## Space Complexity

Space complexity uses a fairly similar technique, although easier to grasp. It accounts for the total number of values stored in memory. For example, an array that stores n values will need O(n) space. Functionally, this means that the required storage space increases linearly with increased array size. Similarly, a 2D array of size n-by-n would require O(n*n) or O(n<sup>2</sup>) space.

Note that stack space required for recursive calls must also be accounted for. More examples will be discussed in the Data Structures section. 

# Big O Notation

Now that you have a basic understanding of why complexity is important, let's look at the most popular method to measure complexity.

## Basic Theory
Big O Notation describes how the input size of an algorithm impacts its runtime. In other words, it shows how scalable an algorithm is for increasing input sizes. The typical Big O runtime categories are listed with a visualization below:
- O(1) - Constant Time
- O(log n) - Logarithmic Time
- O(n) - Linear Time
- O(n log n) - N Log N Time
- O(n<sup>p</sup>) - Polynomial Time
- O(k<sup>n</sup>) - Exponential Time
- O(n!) - Factorial Time

<p align="center">
  <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-complexity-chart.png" alt="big-o-complexity-chart.png"/>
  <br />
  <a href="https://www.bigocheatsheet.com">source: bigocheatsheet.com</a>
</p>

The above image is only meant to show the general shape of the typical Big O functions. At this scale, O(log n) and O(1) appear the same. In reality, O(1) is a horizontal line while O(log n) is a curve that quickly flattens out into a horizontal line. Keep in mind that there are runtimes slower than O(n!). That's just where the chart cuts off.

Let's translate these relationships into practical examples. If we have a snippet of code that has a "constant" time complexity. It means that, no matter how large the input size is, the same amount of primitive operations will be required to execute the code.

If we have a snippet of code that has a "linear" time complexity. We know that runtime will increase linearly with input size. Recall the previous example from the [Time Complexity](#time-complexity) section: 

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/complexity-example-1.png" alt="complexity-example-1.png"/>
</p>

The Big O (i.e. worst case) runtime is O(8n-2) where n is the size of the input array. You may notice that this is a linear relationship as it follows the linear formula `y = mx + b`. This expression can be simplified into the O(n) category.

Why do these relationships matter anyway? Well, software developers use them as a means to compare the performance of different algorithms. If we have two algorithms that can sort an array, but the first has a time complexity of O(n log n) and the second has a time complexity of O(n<sup>2</sup>), we know that the first algorithm will perform much faster for large inputs and is therefore more scalable. You can tell which is better by just looking at the above visualization.

## Simple Cases

To get started, let's derive the Big O time complexity for code commonly seen in simple programs.

Recall that primitive operations include:
- Accesses (i.e. accessing value from an array) -> `array[i]`
- Arithmetic -> `x + 5`
- Assignments -> `x = 5`
- Comparisons -> `x < 5`
- Returns -> `return x`

**Disclaimer:** My school notes count incrementations such as `i++` as **1 operation**. Although, it seems like it should be two. Either may be valid depending on who you ask.

The basic steps for calculating Big O time complexity are as follows:
- Sum the number of primitive operations line by line
- Use the worst case for conditional statements
- Simplify the ending expression

### Example 1: For loops

Let's follow the basic steps on the below code snippet:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-1.png" alt="big-o-example-1.png"/>
</p>


Walking through line by line:

- **Line 1:**
  - One operation (assignment) executed once.

- **Line 2:**
  - One operation (assignment) executed once.
  - One operation (comparison) executed `x + 1` times.
    - For example, if `i = 3`, the conditional would be checked when `i = 0, 1, 2, AND 3`. Therefore, the condition is executed `n + 1` times.
  - One operation (incrementation) executed `n` times (once for every inner loop iteration).

- **Line 4:**
  - Three operations (arithmetic, assign, and access) executed `n` times (once for every inner loop iteration).

Now that we know the complexity of each line, we can sum them into a formula representing the time complexity of the entire algorithm. In this case, we find that the algorithm has a time complexity of O(5n + 3) which is simplified down to O(n).

Why are the constants dropped for simplicity? At large values of n, these constants become relatively insignificant. Realistically, we're only looking for the simplified Big O notation. That's where the biggest time savings are found. If you are looking to compare two algorithms that fall under the same Big O category, then you'd keep the constants. However, that's only really necessary if you're trying to make sure your algorithms are as optimized as possible (nit-picky).

### Example 2: Nested loops

Let's take it a step further. Instead of one loop, let's see what happens when we nest two loops together.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-2.png" alt="big-o-example-2.png"/>
</p>


Finding the time complexity is very similar to the previous example. The twist is that you have to account for the impact of the nesting loops. As we know from the first example, line 1 has a time complexity of O(2n + 2). Line 2, being the exact same type of loop, also has a time complexity of O(2n + 2). However, since line 2 is within a loop, it is executed an additional `n` times. Therefore, the complexity of line 3 is O((2n + 2) * n) = O(2n<sup>2</sup> + 2n). Summing the time complexity of each line shows us that the overall algorithm has a time complexity of O(5n<sup>2</sup> + 4n + 2) or O(n<sup>2</sup>).

Why was the expression simplified to O(n<sup>2</sup>)? Similarly to the previous example, at large values of n, the rest of the expression becomes negligible. Since the difference between Big O categories are incredible orders of magnitude, it really only matters what ballpark the algorithm is in. As such, we simplify the expression to contain the most significant value.

### Example 2.5: Focus on the essentials

You might be thinking, "This process takes forever!", and you'd be right. Typically, software developers do not calculate time complexities down to the last primitive computation. Practical applications of Big O drop the extra details at the end anyway. However, knowing the entire process is important for your understanding.

For the majority of your time using Big O techniques, you will simply be scanning for the "heavy hitters" on each line and their relationships to each other. Let's look at the previous example again and take a more streamlined approach.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-2.1.png" alt="big-o-example-2.1.png"/>
</p>


As you can see, the only important lines to consider were lines 1 and 3. Since we know each loop iterates n times, we know that this compounds into a complexity of O(n<sup>2</sup>) for the inner loop. That was much faster!

## Advanced Cases

The above section explored some fundamental cases. However, as you will find, there are many more advanced cases that require some deeper thinking.

### Example 3: Logarithmic complexity

There is another type of `for` loop that you may come across. Instead of incrementing/decrementing after each iteration, it reduces the remaining iterations by a factor. Here's an example:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-3.png" alt="big-o-example-3.png"/>
</p>

As you can see, instead of incrementing `j`, the inner for loop divides `j` by a factor of 2. When an algorithm's steps are reduced by a factor, the resulting complexity is likely O(log n). Think of it this way. The value of `j` starts at `n` and the loop will continue until `j` falls below 1. With every iteration of the inner loop, the value of `j` is halved. Therefore, the value of `j` is converging to a value below 1 at an exponential rate. Inversely, it could be said that the loops runtime (or required computations) grows at a logarithmic rate with increasing values of `n`. Hence the O(log n) time complexity.

### Example 4: The Sum of Integers 1 through N
Let's expand our horizons by looking at another special case:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-4.png" alt="big-o-example-4.png"/>
</p>


In this example, you will find that the number of iterations of the inner loop depends on the value of `i` in the outer loop. Initially, when `i = 1`, the inner loop iterates once. When `i = 2`, the inner loop iterates twice. This repeats until `i = n` and the inner loop iterates n times. Therefore, through all values of `i`, the inner loop executes the sum of `1 + 2 + ... + n` times. Mathematically, this sum can be simplified to `n(n+2)/2`. Therefore, the complexity of the inner loop is O(n<sup>2</sup>).

Don't worry if you didn't already know that simplification. A 10 year old discovered it back in the late 1700s. To be fair, they grew up to be an amazing mathematician and physicist. If you're not a naturally gifted 10 year old math wizard, you can find an explanation of the proof [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tpkzn2e5mtI).

This pattern appears in software frequently enough that having the formula for the sum of 1 through N memorized is a good idea. 

### Example 5: Recursive functions

Loops are not the only way code executions can be compounded multiple times. Recursive functions act in a similar way. Here's an example function used to calculate the factorial value of an integer:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-5.png" alt="big-o-example-5.png"/>
</p>


As you can see, this function will be recursively called until the input value of `n` is decremented down to 1. Therefore, even though the function itself has a complexity of O(1), it is recursively executed `n` times. As such, the time complexity is O(1) * n = O(n).


### Example 6: Exponential runtimes

In some cases, you will see functions that recursively call themselves multiple times over (the previous example only had one recursive call). A popular example of this is the recursive fibonacci method. It returns the `nth` number of the fibonacci sequence. For example, the beginning of the fibonacci sequence is `1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, ...`. Therefore, `fib(4)` should yield a result of `3`.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-6.png" alt="big-o-example-6.png"/>
</p>


In the above algorithm, fib(4) will recursively branch off into two fib(3) calls. Each fib(3) call will branch into two more fib(2) calls. This will continue until the fib(1) calls end the cycle. This branching is visualized below: 

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/fib-tree.png" alt="fib-tree.png"/>
</p>


To figure out how many times this O(1) function is recursively executed, we must find the number of nodes in the resulting tree. As can be seen, each iteration doubles the number of nodes. Therefore, we know the complexity is exponential because the amount of recursive executions grows at an exponential rate. When dealing with a tree such as this, the complexity can be represented as O(branches<sup>depth</sup>) where `branches` is the number of recursive branches per node and `depth` is the depth of the tree. In other words, `branches` is the number of recursive calls within the function and `depth` is the maximum number of iterations before the input value reaches the end case. Therefore, since there are 2 recursive calls in the function and it takes `n` iterations for the input value `n` to be decremented to 1, the complexity of this function is O(2<sup>n</sup>).

# What next? 

If this is your first time covering these concepts, the best thing you can do right now is practice. There are plenty of practice resources available for free online. Once you feel up to speed, start the [searching algorithms](/tutorials-cheat-sheets/data-structures-and-algorithms/) section.

Commit message:

Added more to space complexity

markdown/tutorials-and-cheat-sheets/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o-notation.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Complexity and Big O Notation
permalink: /tutorials-cheat-sheets/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o-notation/
parent: Data Structures and Algorithms
grand_parent: Tutorials and Cheat Sheets
has_children: false
nav_order: 1
nav_exclude: false
has_toc: false
---

<h1>Complexity and Big O Notation</h1>

### Table of contents:

- [Complexity](#complexity)
  - [Why Complexity?](#why-complexity)
  - [Time Complexity](#time-complexity)
  - [Space Complexity](#space-complexity)
- [Big O Notation](#big-o-notation)
  - [Basic Theory](#basic-theory)
  - [Simple Cases](#simple-cases)
    - [Example 1: For loops](#example-1-for-loops)
    - [Example 2: Nested loops](#example-2-nested-loops)
    - [Example 2.5: Focus on the essentials](#example-25-focus-on-the-essentials)
  - [Advanced Cases](#advanced-cases)
    - [Example 3: Logarithmic complexity](#example-3-logarithmic-complexity)
    - [Example 4: The Sum of Integers 1 through N](#example-4-the-sum-of-integers-1-through-n)
    - [Example 5: Recursive functions](#example-5-recursive-functions)
    - [Example 6: Exponential runtimes](#example-6-exponential-runtimes)
- [What next?](#what-next)

# Complexity

Let's say you have two snippets of code (i.e. algorithms) in front of you. Each snippet performs the same overall function but the implementations are different. If you want to know which one is better in terms of performance/efficiency, the concept of complexity is used.

Complexity is a measure of algorithm performance in terms of the:
- execution time (Time Complexity)
- required storage space in memory (Space Complexity)
- required number of steps or arithmetic operations (Computational Complexity)

In terms of Data Structures and Algorithms, depending on the application, time complexity is typically the priority followed by space complexity. Computational complexity is more of a tie-breaker. 

## Why Complexity?

Why can't we just run each snippet separately and see which algorithm runs faster? There are a number of reasons for this:
- Algorithm performance depends on the input. Algorithms may be faster for certain inputs and slower for others. If we are just manually timing the code, performance can't be tested for all possible inputs.
- Algorithm performance depends on the hardware/environment in which it is run. Therefore, algorithm runtimes cannot be compared unless ran using the same device. 
- Both algorithms would need to be fully implemented in order to test/compare using this method.

Complexity addresses these problems because it provides a way to measure the performance of an algorithm for every possible input regardless of implementation or hardware. 

## Time Complexity

Time complexity addresses the above issues by summing the number of primitive operations and assuming they all take a constant amount of time. Primitive operations include:
- Accesses (i.e. accessing value from an array) -> `array[i]`
- Arithmetic -> `x + 5`
- Assignments -> `x = 5`
- Comparisons -> `x < 5`
- Returns -> `return x`

Let's see an example of this method on a simple algorithm to find the maximum value in a numerical array: 

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/complexity-example-1.png" alt="complexity-example-1.png"/>
</p>

Let's call the functional relationship between the number of operations required to handle an array `t(n)` where `n` is the size of the input array.

In the best case scenario, where the maximum value is at the beginning of the array, line 6 is skipped for every following loop. Therefore, only 4 operations take place in each iteration of the loop. As such:

<p align="center">t(n) = 2 + 1 + 2n + <ins><strong>4</strong></ins>(n-1) + 1 = 6n</p>

If we were to graph this relationship, we'd get a straight line with a slope of 6:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/time-complexity-graph.png" alt="time-complexity-graph.png"/>
</p>

Therefore, for every additional value we add to this array, we're increasing the execution time by 6 primitive operations. 

In the worst case scenario, where the maximum value is at the end of the array, line 6 is never skipped. Therefore, 6 operations take place in each iteration of the loop. As a result: 

<p align="center">t(n) = 2 + 1 + 2n + <ins><strong>6</strong></ins>(n-1) + 1 = 8n-2</p>

In the average case, the maximum value will likely be somewhere in between the first and last element of the array. The resulting performance, therefore, will be somewhere between the best and the worst case.

From this example (more complex examples are to come), you should see how algorithm performance is dependent on the input. In the above example, the size of the input array influenced the execution time of the algorithm. The potential order of numbers within the array resulted in best and worst case execution times. There are 3 notations used to describe these execution times: O, Ω, and Θ.
- O (big O): Upper bound on algorithm execution time.
- Ω (big omega): Lower bound on algorithm execution time.
- Θ (big theta): Both O and Ω simultaneously (unnecessary for tutorial scope).

In industry, the only notation that really matters is Big O. That's because the worst case scenario is the most useful piece of information. Efficient algorithms typically use code that has the minimal "worst case scenario".

## Space Complexity

Space complexity uses a fairly similar technique, although easier to grasp. It accounts for the total number of values stored in memory. For example, an array that stores n values will need O(n) space. Functionally, this means that the required storage space increases linearly with increased array size. Similarly, a 2D array of size n-by-n would require O(n*n) or O(n<sup>2</sup>) space.

With space complexity, you also have to account for the memory used up by recursive calls. For example, if a code snippet appears to have an O(1) space complexity (i.e. does not use any temporary storage dependent on input size) but requires `n` recursive levels to execute, then the algorithm has a space complexity of O(n). You will see plenty examples in the upcoming sections.

# Big O Notation

Now that you have a basic understanding of why complexity is important, let's look at the most popular method to measure complexity.

## Basic Theory
Big O Notation describes how the input size of an algorithm impacts its runtime. In other words, it shows how scalable an algorithm is for increasing input sizes. The typical Big O runtime categories are listed with a visualization below:
- O(1) - Constant Time
- O(log n) - Logarithmic Time
- O(n) - Linear Time
- O(n log n) - N Log N Time
- O(n<sup>p</sup>) - Polynomial Time
- O(k<sup>n</sup>) - Exponential Time
- O(n!) - Factorial Time

<p align="center">
  <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-complexity-chart.png" alt="big-o-complexity-chart.png"/>
  <br />
  <a href="https://www.bigocheatsheet.com">source: bigocheatsheet.com</a>
</p>

The above image is only meant to show the general shape of the typical Big O functions. At this scale, O(log n) and O(1) appear the same. In reality, O(1) is a horizontal line while O(log n) is a curve that quickly flattens out into a horizontal line. Keep in mind that there are runtimes slower than O(n!). That's just where the chart cuts off.

Let's translate these relationships into practical examples. If we have a snippet of code that has a "constant" time complexity. It means that, no matter how large the input size is, the same amount of primitive operations will be required to execute the code.

If we have a snippet of code that has a "linear" time complexity. We know that runtime will increase linearly with input size. Recall the previous example from the [Time Complexity](#time-complexity) section: 

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/complexity-example-1.png" alt="complexity-example-1.png"/>
</p>

The Big O (i.e. worst case) runtime is O(8n-2) where n is the size of the input array. You may notice that this is a linear relationship as it follows the linear formula `y = mx + b`. This expression can be simplified into the O(n) category.

Why do these relationships matter anyway? Well, software developers use them as a means to compare the performance of different algorithms. If we have two algorithms that can sort an array, but the first has a time complexity of O(n log n) and the second has a time complexity of O(n<sup>2</sup>), we know that the first algorithm will perform much faster for large inputs and is therefore more scalable. You can tell which is better by just looking at the above visualization.

## Simple Cases

To get started, let's derive the Big O time complexity for code commonly seen in simple programs.

Recall that primitive operations include:
- Accesses (i.e. accessing value from an array) -> `array[i]`
- Arithmetic -> `x + 5`
- Assignments -> `x = 5`
- Comparisons -> `x < 5`
- Returns -> `return x`

**Disclaimer:** My school notes count incrementations such as `i++` as **1 operation**. Although, it seems like it should be two. Either may be valid depending on who you ask.

The basic steps for calculating Big O time complexity are as follows:
- Sum the number of primitive operations line by line
- Use the worst case for conditional statements
- Simplify the ending expression

### Example 1: For loops

Let's follow the basic steps on the below code snippet:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-1.png" alt="big-o-example-1.png"/>
</p>


Walking through line by line:

- **Line 1:**
  - One operation (assignment) executed once.

- **Line 2:**
  - One operation (assignment) executed once.
  - One operation (comparison) executed `x + 1` times.
    - For example, if `i = 3`, the conditional would be checked when `i = 0, 1, 2, AND 3`. Therefore, the condition is executed `n + 1` times.
  - One operation (incrementation) executed `n` times (once for every inner loop iteration).

- **Line 4:**
  - Three operations (arithmetic, assign, and access) executed `n` times (once for every inner loop iteration).

Now that we know the complexity of each line, we can sum them into a formula representing the time complexity of the entire algorithm. In this case, we find that the algorithm has a time complexity of O(5n + 3) which is simplified down to O(n).

Why are the constants dropped for simplicity? At large values of n, these constants become relatively insignificant. Realistically, we're only looking for the simplified Big O notation. That's where the biggest time savings are found. If you are looking to compare two algorithms that fall under the same Big O category, then you'd keep the constants. However, that's only really necessary if you're trying to make sure your algorithms are as optimized as possible (nit-picky).

### Example 2: Nested loops

Let's take it a step further. Instead of one loop, let's see what happens when we nest two loops together.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-2.png" alt="big-o-example-2.png"/>
</p>


Finding the time complexity is very similar to the previous example. The twist is that you have to account for the impact of the nesting loops. As we know from the first example, line 1 has a time complexity of O(2n + 2). Line 2, being the exact same type of loop, also has a time complexity of O(2n + 2). However, since line 2 is within a loop, it is executed an additional `n` times. Therefore, the complexity of line 3 is O((2n + 2) * n) = O(2n<sup>2</sup> + 2n). Summing the time complexity of each line shows us that the overall algorithm has a time complexity of O(5n<sup>2</sup> + 4n + 2) or O(n<sup>2</sup>).

Why was the expression simplified to O(n<sup>2</sup>)? Similarly to the previous example, at large values of n, the rest of the expression becomes negligible. Since the difference between Big O categories are incredible orders of magnitude, it really only matters what ballpark the algorithm is in. As such, we simplify the expression to contain the most significant value.

### Example 2.5: Focus on the essentials

You might be thinking, "This process takes forever!", and you'd be right. Typically, software developers do not calculate time complexities down to the last primitive computation. Practical applications of Big O drop the extra details at the end anyway. However, knowing the entire process is important for your understanding.

For the majority of your time using Big O techniques, you will simply be scanning for the "heavy hitters" on each line and their relationships to each other. Let's look at the previous example again and take a more streamlined approach.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-2.1.png" alt="big-o-example-2.1.png"/>
</p>


As you can see, the only important lines to consider were lines 1 and 3. Since we know each loop iterates n times, we know that this compounds into a complexity of O(n<sup>2</sup>) for the inner loop. That was much faster!

## Advanced Cases

The above section explored some fundamental cases. However, as you will find, there are many more advanced cases that require some deeper thinking.

### Example 3: Logarithmic complexity

There is another type of `for` loop that you may come across. Instead of incrementing/decrementing after each iteration, it reduces the remaining iterations by a factor. Here's an example:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-3.png" alt="big-o-example-3.png"/>
</p>

As you can see, instead of incrementing `j`, the inner for loop divides `j` by a factor of 2. When an algorithm's steps are reduced by a factor, the resulting complexity is likely O(log n). Think of it this way. The value of `j` starts at `n` and the loop will continue until `j` falls below 1. With every iteration of the inner loop, the value of `j` is halved. Therefore, the value of `j` is converging to a value below 1 at an exponential rate. Inversely, it could be said that the loops runtime (or required computations) grows at a logarithmic rate with increasing values of `n`. Hence the O(log n) time complexity.

### Example 4: The Sum of Integers 1 through N
Let's expand our horizons by looking at another special case:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-4.png" alt="big-o-example-4.png"/>
</p>


In this example, you will find that the number of iterations of the inner loop depends on the value of `i` in the outer loop. Initially, when `i = 1`, the inner loop iterates once. When `i = 2`, the inner loop iterates twice. This repeats until `i = n` and the inner loop iterates n times. Therefore, through all values of `i`, the inner loop executes the sum of `1 + 2 + ... + n` times. Mathematically, this sum can be simplified to `n(n+2)/2`. Therefore, the complexity of the inner loop is O(n<sup>2</sup>).

Don't worry if you didn't already know that simplification. A 10 year old discovered it back in the late 1700s. To be fair, they grew up to be an amazing mathematician and physicist. If you're not a naturally gifted 10 year old math wizard, you can find an explanation of the proof [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tpkzn2e5mtI).

This pattern appears in software frequently enough that having the formula for the sum of 1 through N memorized is a good idea. 

### Example 5: Recursive functions

Loops are not the only way code executions can be compounded multiple times. Recursive functions act in a similar way. Here's an example function used to calculate the factorial value of an integer:

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-5.png" alt="big-o-example-5.png"/>
</p>


As you can see, this function will be recursively called until the input value of `n` is decremented down to 1. Therefore, even though the function itself has a complexity of O(1), it is recursively executed `n` times. As such, the time complexity is O(1) * n = O(n).


### Example 6: Exponential runtimes

In some cases, you will see functions that recursively call themselves multiple times over (the previous example only had one recursive call). A popular example of this is the recursive fibonacci method. It returns the `nth` number of the fibonacci sequence. For example, the beginning of the fibonacci sequence is `1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, ...`. Therefore, `fib(4)` should yield a result of `3`.

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/big-o-example-6.png" alt="big-o-example-6.png"/>
</p>


In the above algorithm, fib(4) will recursively branch off into two fib(3) calls. Each fib(3) call will branch into two more fib(2) calls. This will continue until the fib(1) calls end the cycle. This branching is visualized below: 

<p align="center">
    <img src="/assets/images/data-structures-and-algorithms/complexity-and-big-o/fib-tree.png" alt="fib-tree.png"/>
</p>


To figure out how many times this O(1) function is recursively executed, we must find the number of nodes in the resulting tree. As can be seen, each iteration doubles the number of nodes. Therefore, we know the complexity is exponential because the amount of recursive executions grows at an exponential rate. When dealing with a tree such as this, the complexity can be represented as O(branches<sup>depth</sup>) where `branches` is the number of recursive branches per node and `depth` is the depth of the tree. In other words, `branches` is the number of recursive calls within the function and `depth` is the maximum number of iterations before the input value reaches the end case. Therefore, since there are 2 recursive calls in the function and it takes `n` iterations for the input value `n` to be decremented to 1, the complexity of this function is O(2<sup>n</sup>).

# What next? 

If this is your first time covering these concepts, the best thing you can do right now is practice. There are plenty of practice resources available for free online. Once you feel up to speed, start the [searching algorithms](/tutorials-cheat-sheets/data-structures-and-algorithms/) section.
